(Transcribed by TurboScribe.ai. Go Unlimited to remove this message.)
Reclaimed the Podcast, where we talk about Jesus,
belief, doubt, and what it means to follow
him today.
I'm your host, and I couldn't think of
a better way to launch this journey than
by diving straight into the heart of faith,
especially what happens when faith is born out
of doubt.
Today, I'm joined by someone I deeply respect,
Dr. James Elliott.
He's a biblical scholar, but also someone who's
been through the valley of unbelief.
James, welcome.
Thank you so much.
It's an honor to be here.
Honestly, if you told me 10 years ago
I'd be on a podcast talking about Jesus,
I would have laughed.
Well, that response definitely hints at quite the
journey, and that's exactly what we're doing a
deep dive into today.
Our sources, they're pretty unique this time.
We're really exploring your own path, the academic
notes, personal reflections, that whole intellectual trajectory from,
well, profound skepticism to faith.
You weren't just indifferent, right?
You were genuinely opposed to Christianity.
What was behind that?
What really fueled that resistance for you?
Yeah.
Opposition is the right word.
It wasn't just casual apathy.
It was a conviction.
You see, I grew up in a pretty
secular home, so religion always felt like an
old story, something disconnected from the real empirical
world I lived in.
Ancient history, sort of.
Exactly.
Then when I got into university, studying philosophy,
then biblical studies, my whole approach was purely
academic, almost forensic.
Analyzing texts?
Right.
Like historical artifacts, looking at them with the
same critical eye as any other ancient writing.
And from that viewpoint, honestly, the claims of
Christianity, especially the big ones about God, miracles,
intervention, they just seemed, well, lacking, intellectually weak.
Were there specific things, like a classic question?
Oh, absolutely.
The problem of evil was huge for me.
How can an all good, all powerful God
allow so much suffering?
That felt like an insurmountable logical hurdle.
I read all the philosophical arguments against traditional
theology, and frankly, they made a lot of
sense to me then.
I genuinely believed faith was a crutch.
A way to avoid the tough stuff.
Yeah.
A way to avoid facing the harsh realities
of life, rather than a real search for
truth.
So it wasn't just dismissing it lightly.
It was a deep intellectual engagement against it.
You were really wrestling with the foundations.
Absolutely.
My skepticism felt solid, built on what I
thought was strong intellectual ground.
I studied ancient religions, critical theories about who
wrote the Bible, philosophical critiques.
I felt I had this comprehensive framework that
explained away belief.
Right.
But what I realized much later is that
doubt.
And it's rarely just intellectualism.
Oh, okay.
So there was more going on.
Definitely.
Those questions about evil, about suffering, why God
seems so silent, they weren't just abstract problems
for me.
Looking back, they were deeply emotional, like cries
for answers for justice that I didn't even
recognize as such at the time.
The head and the heart working together, but
in opposition to faith.
Precisely.
The intellectual arguments gave structure to the emotional
turmoil.
And together, they built this really strong shield
against faith.
Skepticism felt necessary, protective even.
That makes a lot of sense.
We do tend to build those intellectual walls
around emotional places.
It's very relatable.
So given that level of skepticism, head and
heart aligned against it, what started to change
things?
Was it one big moment or more like
a slow chipping away at those walls?
It was.
It was both, actually.
And that's kind of key to how it
unfolded for me.
The gradual erosion happened first.
The deeper I went into the biblical text,
even critically, the more I found things that
were hard to just dismiss easily.
Certain narratives, themes, the moral teaching of Jesus,
for instance, the sheer power of some of
the prophets.
They didn't fit your neat categories.
Exactly.
They challenged my frameworks.
I started thinking, if this is just human
invention, how does it carry such profound weight
for thousands of years?
But then there was a pivotal moment.
One specific evening really changed everything.
I was doing what I often did reading
the Gospel of John in Greek, actually, looking
for critical angles, inconsistencies.
Usual approach.
And I came across John 14.6, where
Jesus says, I am the way, the truth,
and the life.
No one comes to the Father except through
me.
A huge verse.
But you said you'd read it, what, 100
times as a critic.
What was different this time?
How did that academic lens just shift?
Yeah.
Critically, it was just this exclusive, frankly, audacious
claim that needed dismantling.
My brain would immediately jump to comparisons, other
ancient religions, philosophy schools, try to contextualize it
away.
Analyze the Greek words.
Exactly.
Dissect way, truth, life, argue about semantics.
It was all intellectual breakdown.
But that night, I don't know, for the
first time, it didn't feel like a claim
about truth.
It felt like an invitation to truth, capitalized.
The word truth.
It just landed differently.
See, my whole academic life, years in philosophy
history, I was chasing truth, relentlessly, an intellectual
truth seeker.
Driven by it.
Completely.
But it hit me right then, with this
clarity.
I was chasing truth, but I had absolutely
no peace, none.
My head was full of theories, arguments, analysis,
but my soul, restless, no calm, no spiritual
rest in all that thinking.
Yeah, wow.
And suddenly, Jesus wasn't just offering answers to
my questions.
He was offering himself, as truth embodied.
And with him, this promise of peace that
my intellect couldn't even compute.
It felt like that fortress I'd built, brick,
biological brick, it just crumbled.
Not from outside attack, but from within.
Yeah.
Because I suddenly saw it was empty inside.
Yeah, a revelation beyond just reason.
Chasing truth, but never finding peace.
That really hits home.
Your experience sounds so much like Thomas, doesn't
it?
The disciple who doubted the resurrection.
And Jesus, in John 20, he says, put
your finger here, reach out your hand, stop
doubting and believe.
He didn't shame Thomas.
He met him right there, in the doubt,
offering proof.
Do you see that parallel?
Did Jesus' approach to Thomas resonate with your
own need for evidence?
Oh, absolutely.
Thomas' story became my story, in a way.
My skepticism, my analytical mind needing evidence, something
I could intellectually touch and see.
That was me.
And like with Thomas, Jesus didn't dismiss my
intellect.
He didn't say, just believe blindly.
He didn't demand I shut down my critical
thinking.
Instead, it felt like he just patiently, gently
pulled me through the skepticism.
Not around it, but through it.
Exactly.
It wasn't like, poof, suddenly all my questions
vanished, or every paradox was solved.
Not at all.
What changed was more profound, a heart level
shift, an invitation into a relationship.
Realizing the person of Jesus wasn't just history
or data.
He was living, inviting.
And the beautiful thing is, even now, as
a scholar, I still have questions.
The world's complex.
My understanding keeps growing.
But what I have now is him.
And somehow, deep down, in a way that
satisfies the soul, that's enough, more than enough.
It's a piece that supports the questions, rather
than waiting for all the answers.
That's a really powerful place to land, especially
from where you started.
The faith isn't about having zero questions, but
about connection.
Emerging from skepticism could lead down many paths.
Why Jesus, specifically?
In a world full of religions, worldviews, what
makes Jesus unique for you?
What makes him compelling?
Right.
This is the absolute core for me.
The thing that just stands out.
It's what made Christianity radically different from everything
else I studied.
Simply put, because only Jesus dies for you.
Okay.
Untack that.
Well, think about almost any other system, religious
or philosophical.
At its heart, the message is usually some
version of, do better, try harder, reach enlightenment,
purify yourself, follow these rules, do these rituals,
gain this wisdom.
Keep effort on us.
Always.
The burden is on you.
Your effort earns your salvation, your peace, whatever
the goal is.
But Christianity, with Jesus at the center, it
just flips that whole thing upside down.
It offers something utterly different.
Grace.
Exactly.
Paul puts it so powerfully in Romans 5
.8, and this verse just hit me intellectually
and emotionally.
While we were still sinners, Christ died for
us.
Just think about the timing there.
While we were sinners, not after we got
our act together.
Not after we earned it.
No.
While we were broken, rebellious even, flawed, actively
messing up.
That kind of unconditional preemptive love, you don't
find that anywhere else.
It's unearned, undeserved.
Jesus didn't just teach truth.
He was truth, and then he became the
sacrifice.
Understanding the cross, not just historically, academically, but
personally, as something done for me, to bridge
the gap my own failures created, well, it
broke me.
Broke you.
Yeah.
In a good way.
Shattered the self-sufficiency, the intellectual pride, the
idea I could earn my way.
And right there in that breaking, it healed
me.
Filled a void I hadn't even fully admitted
was there.
It's a love that comes before effort, before
worthiness, before being good enough.
That's why Jesus is just radically different.
It's such a clear, powerful way to put
it.
Not what we do, but what's done for
us.
I can really hear how deeply that landed
for you emotionally and intellectually.
So thinking about someone listening now, maybe they're
right in that place you described.
Wrestling with doubts, big questions.
Maybe they want to believe, but just don't
know how to start.
What would you say to them based on
your own journey?
Any practical advice or spiritual encouragement?
Yeah.
The biggest thing, the most crucial first step
I'd say is start right where you are,
right now.
Don't try to fake faith you don't have.
Don't pretend.
Be completely, maybe even brutally honest with God.
If you're open to that possibility with yourself,
with safe people.
Just raw honesty.
Utterly.
If you're angry, say you're angry.
If you doubt he even exists, tell him
that.
He can take it.
Seriously.
Your questions, your frustration, your skepticism, it doesn't
scare him off.
He actually welcomes the honesty.
It's freeing.
It is.
And Jesus himself gave this incredible promise in
Matthew 7.7. It's been a guidepost for
me even now.
Ask and it will be given to you.
Seek and you will find.
Knock and the door will be opened.
Notice the verbs there.
Ask, seek, knock.
They're active.
It's an invitation to engage.
Not passive waiting.
It doesn't say figure everything out perfectly, then
believe.
It doesn't say resolve every paradox first.
It just says, ask, seek, knock.
It implies a posture of wanting to find
out, a humble inquiry, persistent pursuit.
You don't need the whole roadmap worked out.
You don't need a theology degree.
Just knock.
Be persistent with the questions.
Stay open to finding something and keep seeking
him.
He promises he'll be found.
And in my experience, he keeps his promises.
Amen.
And if you're listening, we truly are praying
for you.
Your questions aren't a roadblock.
They might just be the road itself.
Faith isn't a performance.
It's a relationship.
It's a journey that often starts with that
raw vulnerability, that single brave knock.
It's about being met in the middle of
your doubt, just like Thomas was.
Dr. James, thank you for sharing your journey.
We started with doubt and ended with a
Savior who never gives up on us.
If this episode spoke to you, don't forget
to subscribe, share, and leave a comment.
And remember, God is not afraid of your
doubts.
He welcomes your questions, and he meets you
there with grace.
Until next time, keep seeking, keep knocking, and
keep walking toward the light.